###### How will COVID-19 and April's executive order impact employment-based (EB) petitioners?
* COVID-19 has been an onslaught on the world on multiple fronts, including the U.S. employment-based immigration system. At this moment, it is yet still difficult to quantitatively estimate the impact of COIVD-19 on the immigration process. Without putting the cart ahead of the horse, we can nevertheless make several best-effort speculations.
* 新冠病毒已经对包括美国职业移民系统在内的多个方面都造成了猛烈的冲击。但是目前依然难以定量评估新冠病毒对移民系统产生的影响。在这里，我们针对各种情况，尽量做出一些合理的推测。
* In late April 2020, the Trump administration issued an executive order (EO), temporarily putting green card processing for applicants outside the US on hold for 60 days. It is still unclear how long it will last eventually, as the President has the prerogative to extend this order. Additionally, this EO also made an reference to a second order aimed at non-immigrant work visas, which may potentially change the lives of hundreds of thousands of temporary workers primarily on H-1B visas. It is unclear when or whether it will be issued at all, much less how exactly this second order may turn out to be.
* The pandemic quarantine measures have greatly strained the global economy, resulting in an unprecedentedly high unemployment rate. Although the current crisis is believed to be temporary by many, there could be several long-term after effects on the current employment-based immigration system, both adverse and favorable.
* For applicants who filed inside the U.S. (i.e. via Form I-485): Together with the EO, COVID-19 has been, and will continue for a while, significantly reducing the immigrant visa number (green card quota) demand directly from outside the US (i.e. Consular Processing, or colloquially known as CP). This could lead to an overall reduction of demand, and potentially help accelerate advancement in the visa bulletin. We have already seen a (slightly) faster-than-anticipated advancing speed in the most recent May visa bulletin. Note that this visa bulletin, finalized in a date earlier than the EO, is not believed to have considered the policies as laid out in the EO. The June visa bulletin will show the impact of EO in a clearer way.
* For applicants who filed outside the U.S. (i.e. via CP): Unfortunately, the adjudication processes for CP have been suspended by the EO, with the notable exemption of EB-5. On the bright side, the CP immigration program has not been terminated. Once the EO expires, the visa numbers will be again allocated to CP applicants.
* COVID-19 has result in reorg/layoff among a large number of businesses, directly threatening the legal statuses of many EB applicants. In fact, other than applicants filing under EB1-A, EB2-NIW, most EB applicants out of their job needs to find a job immediately to maintain legal status. Workers in the oil industry face even greater jeopardy, given the recent oil price crisis. The affected will not be eligible for green card, even if they have a current priority date, due to the similar-job clause in AC-21. While brutal, this will effectively reduce the demand of green cards, leading to a faster advancing speed. 
* USCIS field offices have been shut down for a while, suspending all in-person interviews. Even though there are anecdotal reports of applicants approved for EB green cards without first having been interviewed, this may reduce immediate green card demand from countries and/or categories with a current priority date (i.e. EB1-ROW and EB2-ROW). We speculate this may lead to minor internal resource reallocation towards the backlogged countries and/or categories (EB1-China, EB1-India, EB2-China, EB2-India).
* The family-based immigration processes are the most adversely affected. It is almost certain that most of family-based visa numbers will not be used in FY2020. If the DOS/USCIS sticks to their current policy, those unused visa numbers will be made available to EB applicants in the next fiscal year (i.e. FY2021 starting from Oct 2020). A greater "spill-over" (SO) from FB into the EB category is expected to alleviate the backlog in the latter.
* We wish you best of luck and best of health in the times of uncertainty, and get GREENED soon!

